# Hartree-Fock

The NWChem self-consistent field (SCF) module computes closed-shell
restricted Hartree-Fock (RHF) wavefunctions, restricted high-spin
open-shell Hartree-Fock (ROHF) wavefunctions, and spin-unrestricted
Hartree-Fock (UHF) wavefunctions. The Hartree-Fock equations are solved
using a conjugate-gradient method with an orbital Hessian based
preconditioner\[1\]. The module supports both replicated data and
distributed data Fock builders\[2\].

The SCF directive provides input to the SCF module and is a compound
directive that encloses additional directives specific to the SCF
module:

` SCF`  
`   ...`  
` END`

## Wavefunction type

A spin-restricted, closed shell RHF calculation is performed by default.
An error results if the number of electrons is inconsistent with this
assumption. The number of electrons is inferred from the total charge on
the system and the sum of the effective nuclear charges of all centers
(atoms and dummy atoms, see [GEOMETRY](Geometry "wikilink")).
The total charge on the system is zero by default, unless specified at
some value by input on the CHARGE directive [Total system
charge](Charge "wikilink").

The options available to define the SCF wavefunction and multiplicity
are as follows:

` SINGLET `  
` DOUBLET `  
` TRIPLET `  
` QUARTET `  
` QUINTET `  
` SEXTET`  
` SEPTET`  
` OCTET`  
` NOPEN <integer nopen default 0>`  
` RHF`  
` ROHF`  
` UHF`

The optional keywords SINGLET, DOUBLET, ..., OCTET and NOPEN allow the
user to specify the number of singly occupied orbitals for a particular
calculation. SINGLET is the default, and specifies a closed shell;
DOUBLET specifies one singly occupied orbital; TRIPLET specifies two
singly occupied orbitals; and so forth. If there are more than seven
singly occupied orbitals, the keyword NOPEN must be used, with the
integer nopen defining the number of singly occupied orbitals (sometimes
referred to as open shells).

If the multiplicity is any value other than SINGLET, the default
calculation will be a spin-restricted, high-spin, open-shell SCF
calculation (keyword ROHF). The open-shell orbitals must be the highest
occupied orbitals. If necessary, any starting vectors may be rearranged
through the use of the SWAP keyword on the
[VECTORS](#VECTORS_--_input.2Foutput_of_MO_vectors "wikilink") directive
to accomplish this.

A spin-unrestricted solution can also be performed by specifying the
keyword UHF. In UHF calculations, it is assumed that the number of
singly occupied orbitals corresponds to the difference between the
number of alpha-spin and beta-spin orbitals. For example, a UHF
calculation with 2 more alpha-spin orbitals than beta-spin orbitals can
be obtained by specifying

` scf`  
`    triplet ; uhf    # (Note: two logical lines of input)`  
`    ...`  
` end`

The user should be aware that, by default, molecular orbitals are
symmetry adapted in NWChem. This may not be desirable for fully
unrestricted wavefunctions. In such cases, the user has the option of
defeating the defaults by specifying the keywords
[ADAPT](#ADAPT_-_symmetry_adaptation_of_MOs "wikilink") OFF and
[SYM](#SYM "wikilink") OFF .

The keywords RHF and ROHF are provided in the code for completeness. It
may be necessary to specify these in order to modify the behavior of a
previous calculation (see [NWChem
Architecture](NWChem-Architecture "wikilink") for restart behavior).

## SYM -- use of symmetry

`  SYM <string (ON||OFF) default ON>`

This directive enables/disables the use of symmetry to speed up Fock
matrix construction (via the petite-list or skeleton algorithm) in the
SCF, if symmetry was used in the specification of the geometry. Symmetry
adaptation of the molecular orbitals is not affected by this option. The
default is to use symmetry if it is specified in the [geometry
directive](Geometry "wikilink").

For example, to disable use of symmetry in Fock matrix construction:

` sym off`

## ADAPT - symmetry adaptation of MOs

` ADAPT <string (ON||OFF) default ON>`

The default in the SCF module calculation is to force symmetry adaption
of the molecular orbitals. This does not affect the speed of the
calculation, but without explicit adaption the resulting orbitals may be
symmetry contaminated for some problems. This is especially likely if
the calculation is started using orbitals from a distorted geometry.

The underlying assumption in the use of symmetry in Fock matrix
construction is that the density is totally symmetric. If the orbitals
are symmetry contaminated, this assumption may not be valid -- which
could result in incorrect energies and poor convergence of the
calculation. It is thus advisable when specifying ADAPT OFF to also
specify SYM OFF ([Use of Symmetry](#SYM_--_use_of_symmetry "wikilink")).

## TOL2E -- integral screening threshold

` TOL2E <real tol2e default min(10e-7 , 0.01*thresh)>`

The variable tol2e is used in determining the integral screening
threshold for the evaluation of the energy and related Fock-like
matrices. The Schwarz inequality is used to screen the product of
integrals and density matrices in a manner that results in an accuracy
in the energy and Fock matrices that approximates the value specified
for tol2e.

It is generally not necessary to set this parameter directly. Specify
instead the required precision in the wavefunction, using the THRESH
directive ([Convergence
threshold](#thresh----convergence-threshold "wikilink")). The default
threshold is the minimum of <img alt="$10^{-7}$" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/f7ed66ae8d8f913f33d096b40bf1fcfd.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="33.140745pt" height="26.70657pt"/> and 0.01 times the requested
convergence threshold for the SCF calculation ([Convergence
threshold](#thresh----convergence-threshold "wikilink")).

The input to specify the threshold explicitly within the SCF directive
is, for example:

` tol2e 1e-9`

For very diffuse basis sets, or for high-accuracy calculations it might
be necessary to set this parameter. A value of <img alt="$10^{-12}$" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/aeab78344f8b0fe0d6b7163980cf8ff1.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="39.668805pt" height="26.70657pt"/> is
sufficient for nearly all such
purposes.

## VECTORS -- input/output of MO vectors

` VECTORS [[input] (`<string input_movecs default atomic>`) || \`  
`                  (project `<string basisname>` `<string filename>`) || \`  
`                  (fragment `<string file1>` [`<string file2>` ...])] \`  
`         [swap [alpha||beta] `<integer vec1 vec2>` ...] \`  
`         [reorder `<integer atom1 atom2>` ...] \`  
`         [output `<string output_filename default input_movecs>`] \`  
`         [lock]`  
`         [rotate  `<string input_geometry>` `<string input_movecs>`]`

The VECTORS directive allows the user to specify the source and
destination of the molecular orbital vectors. In a startup calculation
(see [START](Top-level#START_and_RESTART_--_Start-up_mode "wikilink")),
the default source for guess vectors is a diagonalized Fock matrix
constructed from a superposition of the atomic density matrices for the
particular problem. This is usually a very good guess. For a restarted
calculation, the default is to use the previous MO vectors.

The optional keyword INPUT allows the user to specify the source of the
input molecular orbital vectors as any of the following:

  - ATOMIC -- eigenvectors of a Fock-like matrix formed from a
    superposition of the atomic densities (the default guess). See
    [Atomic
    guess](SCF#Atomic_guess_orbitals_with_charged_atoms "wikilink") and
    [Accuracy of initial guess](#Accuracy_of_initial_guess "wikilink").
  - HCORE -- eigenvectors of the bare-nucleus Hamiltonian or the
    one-electron Hamiltonian.
  - filename -- the name of a file containing the MO vectors from a
    previous calculation. Note that unless the path is fully qualified,
    or begins with a dot ("."), then it is assumed to reside in the
    directory for permanent files (see [File
    directories](Top-level#SCRATCH_DIR_and_PERMANENT_DIR_--_File_directories "wikilink")).
  - PROJECT basisname filename -- projects the existing MO vectors in
    the file filename from the smaller basis with name basisname into
    the current basis. The definition of the basis basisname must be
    available in the current database, and the basis must be smaller
    than the current basis. In addition, the geometry used for the
    previous calculations must have the atoms in the same order and in
    the same orientation as the current geometry.
  - FRAGMENT file1 ... -- assembles starting MO vectors from previously
    performed calculations on fragments of the system and is described
    in more detail in [Superposition of fragment molecular
    orbitals](#Superposition_of_fragment_molecular_orbitals "wikilink").
    Even though there are some significant restrictions in the use of
    the initial implementation of this method (see [Superposition of
    fragment molecular
    orbitals](#Superposition_of_fragment_molecular_orbitals "wikilink")),
    this is the most powerful initial guess option within the code. It
    is particularly indispensable for open shell metallic systems.
  - ROTATE input\_geometry input\_movecs -- rotates MO vectors generated
    at a previous geometry to the current active geometry.

The molecular orbitals are saved every iteration if more than 600
seconds have elapsed, and also at the end of the calculation. At
completion (converged or not), the SCF module always canonically
transforms the molecular orbitals by separately diagonalizing the
closed-closed, open-open, and virtual-virtual blocks of the Fock matrix.

The name of the file used to store the MO vectors is determined as
follows:

  - if the OUTPUT keyword was specified on the VECTORS directive, then
    the filename that follows this keyword is used, or
  - if the input vectors were read from a file, this file is reused for
    the output vectors (overwriting the input vectors); else,
  - a default file name is generated in the directory for permanent
    files ([File
    directories](Top-level#SCRATCH_DIR_and_PERMANENT_DIR_--_File_directories "wikilink"))
    by prepending ".movecs" with the file prefix, i.e.,
    "<file_prefix>.movecs".

The name of this file is stored in the database so that a subsequent SCF
calculation will automatically restart from these MO vectors.

Applications of this directive are illustrated in the following
examples.

Example 1:

` vectors output h2o.movecs`

Assuming a start-up calculation, this directive will result in use of
the default atomic density guess, and will output the vectors to the
file h2o.movecs.

Example 2:

` vectors input initial.movecs output final.movecs`

This directive will result in the initial vectors being read from the
file "initial.movecs". The results will be written to the file
final.movecs. The contents of "initial.movecs" will not be changed.

Example 3:

` vectors input project "small basis" small.movecs`

This directive will cause the calculation to start from vectors in the
file "small.movecs" which are in a basis named "small basis". The output
vectors will be written to the default file "\<file\_prefix.movecs\>".

Once starting vectors have been obtained using any of the possible
options, they may be reordered through use of the SWAP keyword. This
optional keyword requires a list of orbital pairs that will be swapped.
For UHF calculations, separate SWAP keywords may be provided for the
alpha and beta orbitals, as necessary.

An example of use of the SWAP directive:

` vectors input try1.movecs swap 173 175 174 176 output try2.movecs`

This directive will cause the initial orbitals to be read from the file
"try1.movecs". The vectors for the orbitals within the pairs 173-175
will be swapped with those within 174-176, so the resulting order is
175, 176, 173, 174. The final orbitals obtained in the calculation will
be written to the file "try2.movecs".

The swapping of orbitals occurs as a sequential process in the order
(left to right) input by the user. Thus, regarding each pair as an
elementary transposition it is possible to construct arbitrary
permutations of the orbitals. For instance, to apply the permutation
<img alt="$(6 7 8 9)$" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/0f1e8657b56e7bdaf8f983f8faf7f475.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="45.491655pt" height="24.56553pt"/> we note that this permutation is equal to
<img alt="$(6 7)(7 8)(8 9)$" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/c92f90c8ec6a25f6c4b682f5a77029ab.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="87.34407pt" height="24.56553pt"/>, and thus may be specified as

` vectors swap 8 9  7 8  6 7`

Another example, now illustrating this feature for a UHF calculation, is
the directive

` vectors swap beta 4 5 swap alpha 5 6`

This input will result in the swapping of the 5-6 alpha orbital pair and
the 4-5 beta orbital pair. (All other items in the input use the default
values.)

The LOCK keyword allows the user to specify that the ordering of
orbitals will be locked to that of the initial vectors, insofar as
possible. The default is to order by ascending orbital energies within
each orbital space. One application where locking might be desirable is
a calculation where it is necessary to preserve the ordering of a
previous geometry, despite flipping of the orbital energies. For such a
case, the LOCK directive can be used to prevent the SCF calculation from
changing the ordering, even if the orbital energies change.

The mapping of the MO's to the nuclei can be changed using the REORDER
keyword. Once starting vectors have been obtained using any of the
possible options, the REORDER keyword moves the MO coefficients between
atoms listed in the integer list. This keyword is particularly useful
for calculating localized electron and hole states.

This optional keyword requires a list containing the new atom ordering.
It is not necessary to provide separate lists for alpha and beta
orbitals.

An example of use of the REORDER keyword:

` vectors input try1.movecs reorder 2 1 output try2.movecs`

This directive will cause the initial orbitals to be read from the file
"try1.movecs". The MO coefficients for the basis functions on atom 2
will be swapped with those on atom 1. The final orbitals obtained in the
calculation will be written to the file "try2.movecs".

The following example shows how the ROTATE keyword can be used to rotate
MO vectors calculated at geometry geom1 to geometry geom2, which has a
different rotational orientation:

`set geometry geom1`  
`dft`  
` vectors input atomic output geom1.mo`  
`end`  
`task dft`  
`set geometry geom2`  
`dft`  
` vectors input rotate geom1 geom1.mo output geom2.mo`  
`end`  
`task dft`

### Superposition of fragment molecular orbitals

The fragment initial guess is particularly useful in the following
instances:

  - The system naturally decomposes into molecules that can be treated
    individually, e.g., a cluster.
  - One or more fragments are particularly hard to converge and
    therefore much time can be saved by converging them independently.
  - A fragment (e.g., a metal atom) must be prepared with a specific
    occupation. This can often be readily accomplished with a
    calculation on the fragment using dummy charges to model a ligand
    field.
  - The molecular occupation predicted by the atomic initial guess is
    often wrong for systems with heavy metals which may have partially
    occupied orbitals with lower energy than some doubly occupied
    orbitals. The fragment initial guess avoids this problem.

` VECTORS [input] fragment `<string file1>` [`<string file2>` ...]`

The molecular orbitals are formed by superimposing the previously
generated orbitals of fragments of the molecule being studied. These
fragment molecular orbitals must be in the same basis as the current
calculation. The input specifies the files containing the fragment
molecular orbitals. For instance, in a calculation on the water dimer,
one might specify

` vectors fragment h2o1.movecs h2o2.movecs`

where h2o1.movecs contains the orbitals for the first fragment, and
h2o2.movecs contains the orbitals for the second fragment.

A complete example of the input for a calculation on the water dimer
using the fragment guess is as follows:

`  start dimer`  
`  title "Water dimer SCF using fragment initial guess"`  
`  geometry dimer`  
`    O   -0.595   1.165  -0.048`  
`    H    0.110   1.812  -0.170`  
`    H   -1.452   1.598  -0.154`  
`    O    0.724  -1.284   0.034`  
`    H    0.175  -2.013   0.348`  
`    H    0.177  -0.480   0.010`  
`  end`  
`  geometry h2o1`  
`    O   -0.595   1.165  -0.048`  
`    H    0.110   1.812  -0.170`  
`    H   -1.452   1.598  -0.154`  
`  end`  
`  geometry h2o2`  
`    O    0.724  -1.284   0.034`  
`    H    0.175  -2.013   0.348`  
`    H    0.177  -0.480   0.010`  
`  end`  
`  basis`  
`    o library 3-21g`  
`    h library 3-21g`  
`  end`  
`  set geometry h2o1`  
`  scf; vectors input atomic output h2o1.movecs; end`  
`  task scf`  
`  set geometry h2o2`  
`  scf; vectors input atomic output h2o2.movecs; end`  
`  task scf`  
`  set geometry dimer`  
`  scf`  
`  vectors input fragment h2o1.movecs h2o2.movecs \`  
`          output dimer.movecs`  
`  end`  
`  task scf`

First, the geometry of the dimer and the two monomers are specified and
given names. Then, after the basis specification, calculations are
performed on the fragments by setting the geometry to the appropriate
fragment
([SET](Top-level#SET_--_Enter_data_in_the_RTDB "wikilink"))
and redirecting the output molecular orbitals to an appropriately named
file. Note also that use of the atomic initial guess is forced, since
the default initial guess is to use any existing MOs which would not be
appropriate for the second fragment calculation. Finally, the dimer
calculation is performed by specifying the dimer geometry, indicating
use of the fragment guess, and redirecting the output MOs.

The following points are important in using the fragment initial guess:

1.  The fragment calculations must be in the same basis set as the full
    calculation.
2.  The order of atoms in the fragments and the order in which the
    fragment files are specified must be such that when the fragment
    basis sets are concatenated all the basis functions are in the same
    order as in the full system. This is readily accomplished by first
    generating the full geometry with atoms for each fragment
    contiguous, splitting this into numbered fragments and specifying
    the fragment MO files in the correct order on the VECTORS directive.
3.  The occupation of orbitals is preserved when they are merged from
    the fragments to the full molecule and the resulting occupation must
    match the requested occupation for the full molecule. E.g., a
    triplet ROHF calculation must be comprised of fragments that have a
    total of exactly two open-shell orbitals.
4.  Because of these restrictions, it is not possible to introduce
    additional atoms (or basis functions) into fragments for the purpose
    of cleanly breaking real bonds. However, it is possible, and highly
    recommended, to introduce additional point charges to simulate the
    presence of other fragments.
5.  MO vectors of partially occupied or strongly polarized systems are
    very sensitive to orientation. While it is possible to specify the
    same fragment MO vector file multiple times in the VECTORS
    directive, it is usually much better to do a separate calculation
    for each fragment.
6.  Linear dependencies which were present in a fragment calculation may
    be magnified in the full calculation. When this occurs, some of the
    fragment's highest virtual orbitals will not be copied to the full
    system, and a warning will be printed.

A more involved example is now presented. We wish to model the sextet
state of Fe(III) complexed with water, imidazole and a heme with a net
unit positive charge. The default atomic guess does not give the correct
<img alt="$d^5$" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/81701ee85f8bb9d3d7757e8fb5463c7e.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="15.052125pt" height="26.70657pt"/> occupation for the metal and also gives an incorrect state for
the double anion of the heme. The following performs calculations on all
of the fragments. Things to note are:

1.  The use of a dummy *+2* charge in the initial guess on the heme
    which in part simulates the presence of the metal ion, and also
    automatically forces an additional two electrons to be added to the
    system (the default net charge being zero).
2.  The iron fragment calculation (charge +3, <img alt="$d^5$" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/81701ee85f8bb9d3d7757e8fb5463c7e.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="15.052125pt" height="26.70657pt"/>, sextet) will
    yield the correct open-shell occupation for the full system. If,
    instead, the d-orbitals were partially occupied (e.g., the doublet
    state) it would be useful to introduce dummy charges around the iron
    to model the ligand field and thereby lift the degeneracy to obtain
    the correct occupation.
3.  <img alt="$C_s$" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/2b5bd0bee00271e01a0c9266f09fb5c3.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="17.886165pt" height="22.38192pt"/> symmetry is used for all of the calculations. It is not
    necessary that the same symmetry be used in all of the calculations,
    provided that the order and orientation of the atoms is preserved.
4.  The unset scf:\* directive is used immediately before the
    calculation on the full system so that the default name for the
    output MO vector file can be used, rather than having to specify it
    explicitly.

`start heme6a1`  
`title  "heme-H2O (6A1) from M.Dupuis"`  
`############################################################`  
`# Define the geometry of the full system and the fragments #`  
`############################################################`  
`geometry full-system`  
`  symmetry cs`  
`  H     0.438   -0.002    4.549`  
`  C     0.443   -0.001    3.457`  
`  C     0.451   -1.251    2.828`  
`  C     0.452    1.250    2.828`  
`  H     0.455    2.652    4.586`  
`  H     0.461   -2.649    4.586`  
`  N1    0.455   -1.461    1.441`  
`  N1    0.458    1.458    1.443`  
`  C     0.460    2.530    3.505`  
`  C     0.462   -2.530    3.506`  
`  C     0.478    2.844    1.249`  
`  C     0.478    3.510    2.534`  
`  C     0.478   -2.848    1.248`  
`  C     0.480   -3.513    2.536`  
`  C     0.484    3.480    0.000`  
`  C     0.485   -3.484    0.000`  
`  H     0.489    4.590    2.664`  
`  H     0.496   -4.592    2.669`  
`  H     0.498    4.573    0.000`  
`  H     0.503   -4.577    0.000`  
`  H    -4.925    1.235    0.000`  
`  H    -4.729   -1.338    0.000`  
`  C    -3.987    0.685    0.000`  
`  N    -3.930   -0.703    0.000`  
`  C    -2.678    1.111    0.000`  
`  C    -2.622   -1.076    0.000`  
`  H    -2.284    2.126    0.000`  
`  H    -2.277   -2.108    0.000`  
`  N    -1.838    0.007    0.000`  
`  Fe    0.307    0.000    0.000`  
`  O     2.673   -0.009    0.000`  
`  H     3.238   -0.804    0.000`  
`  H     3.254    0.777    0.000`  
`end`  
`geometry ring-only`  
`  symmetry cs`  
`  H     0.438   -0.002    4.549`  
`  C     0.443   -0.001    3.457`  
`  C     0.451   -1.251    2.828`  
`  C     0.452    1.250    2.828`  
`  H     0.455    2.652    4.586`  
`  H     0.461   -2.649    4.586`  
`  N1    0.455   -1.461    1.441`  
`  N1    0.458    1.458    1.443`  
`  C     0.460    2.530    3.505`  
`  C     0.462   -2.530    3.506`  
`  C     0.478    2.844    1.249`  
`  C     0.478    3.510    2.534`  
`  C     0.478   -2.848    1.248`  
`  C     0.480   -3.513    2.536`  
`  C     0.484    3.480    0.000`  
`  C     0.485   -3.484    0.000`  
`  H     0.489    4.590    2.664`  
`  H     0.496   -4.592    2.669`  
`  Bq    0.307    0.0      0.0    charge 2  # simulate the iron`  
`end`  
`geometry imid-only`  
`  symmetry cs`  
`  H     0.498    4.573    0.000`  
`  H     0.503   -4.577    0.000`  
`  H    -4.925    1.235    0.000`  
`  H    -4.729   -1.338    0.000`  
`  C    -3.987    0.685    0.000`  
`  N    -3.930   -0.703    0.000`  
`  C    -2.678    1.111    0.000`  
`  C    -2.622   -1.076    0.000`  
`  H    -2.284    2.126    0.000`  
`  H    -2.277   -2.108    0.000`  
`  N    -1.838    0.007    0.000`  
`end`  
`geometry fe-only`  
`  symmetry cs`  
`  Fe    .307    0.000    0.000`  
`end`  
`geometry water-only`  
`  symmetry cs`  
`  O     2.673   -0.009    0.000`  
`  H     3.238   -0.804    0.000`  
`  H     3.254    0.777    0.000`  
`end`  
`############################`  
`# Basis set for everything #`  
`############################`  
`basis nosegment`  
` O  library 6-31g*`  
` N  library 6-31g*`  
` C  library 6-31g*`  
` H  library 6-31g*`  
` Fe  library "Ahlrichs pVDZ"`  
`end`  
`##########################################################`  
`# SCF on the fragments for initial guess for full system #`  
`##########################################################`  
`scf; thresh 1e-2; end`  
`set geometry ring-only`  
`scf; vectors atomic swap 80 81 output ring.mo; end`  
`task scf`  
`set geometry water-only`  
`scf; vectors atomic output water.mo; end`  
`task scf`  
`set geometry imid-only`  
`scf; vectors atomic output imid.mo; end`  
`task scf`  
`charge 3`  
`set geometry fe-only`  
`scf; sextet; vectors atomic output fe.mo; end`  
`task scf`  
`##########################`  
`# SCF on the full system #`  
`##########################`  
`unset scf:*     # This restores the defaults`  
`charge 1`  
`set geometry full-system`  
`scf`  
` sextet`  
` vectors fragment ring.mo imid.mo fe.mo water.mo`  
` maxiter 50`  
`end`  
`task scf`

### Example of projecting smaller basis into larger basis

Key ingredient needed: definition of both the smaller and the larger
basis set, plus mention of the small basis set in the "`input project`"
line.

    start he
    
    geometry
     he 0 0 0
     symmetry oh
    end
    
    basis  small
     * library sto-3g
    end
    basis  large
     * library 3-21g
    end
    
    set "ao basis" small
    scf
     vectors input atomic output small.mos
    end
    task scf  
    
    set "ao basis" large
    scf
     vectors input project small small.mos output large.mos
    end
    task scf

### Atomic guess orbitals with charged atoms

As noted above, the default guess vectors are based on superimposing the
density matrices of the neutral atoms. If some atoms are significantly
charged, this default guess may be improved upon by modifying the atomic
densities. This is done by setting parameters that add fractional
charges to the occupation of the valence atomic orbitals. Since the
atomic SCF program does not have its own input block, the SET directive
([SET](Top-level#SET "wikilink")) must be used to set these
parameters.

The input specifies a list of tags (i.e., names of atoms in a geometry,
see [GEOMETRY](Geometry "wikilink")) and the charges to be
added to those centers. Two parameters must be set as follows:

` set atomscf:tags_z `<string list_of_tags>  
` set atomscf:z      `<real list_of_charges>

The array of strings atomscf:tags\_z should be set to the list of tags,
and the array atomscf:z should be set to the list of charges which must
be real numbers (not integers). All atoms that have a tag specified in
the list of tags will be assigned the corresponding charge from the list
of charges.

For example, the following specifies that all oxygen atoms with tag O be
assigned a charge of -1 and all iron atoms with tag Fe be assigned a
charge of +2

` set atomscf:z        -1  2.0`  
` set atomscf:tags_z    O  Fe`

There are some limitations to this feature. It is not possible to add
electrons to closed shell atoms, nor is it possible to remove all
electrons from a given atom. Attempts to do so will cause the code to
report an error, and it will not report further errors in the input for
modifying the charge even when they are detected.

Finally, recall that the database is persistent ([Data
persistence](Nwarch#Persistence_of_data_and_restart "wikilink"))
and that the modified settings will be used in subsequent atomic guess
calculations unless the data is deleted from the database with the UNSET
directive
([UNSET](Top-level#UNSET_--_Delete_data_in_the_RTDB "wikilink")).

## Accuracy of initial guess

For SCF, the initial Fock-matrix construction from the atomic guess is
performed to a default precision of 1e-7. However, other wavefunctions,
notably DFT, use a lower precision. In charged, or diffuse basis sets,
this precision may not be sufficient and could result in incorrect
ordering of the initial orbitals. The accuracy may be increased with the
following directive which should be inserted in the top-level of input
(i.e., outside of the SCF input block) and before the TASK directive.

` set tolguess 1e-7`

## THRESH -- convergence threshold

` THRESH  <real thresh default 1.0e-4>`

This directive specifies the convergence threshold for the calculation.
The convergence threshold is the norm of the orbital gradient, and has a
default value in the code of <img alt="$10^{-4}$" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/6784e1fd68d75a57b35bd36247a1aefe.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="33.140745pt" height="26.70657pt"/>.

The norm of the orbital gradient corresponds roughly to the precision
available in the wavefunction, and the energy should be converged to
approximately the square of this number. It should be noted, however,
that the precision in the energy will not exceed that of the integral
screening tolerance. This tolerance ([Integral screening
threshold](#TOL2E_--_integral_screening_threshold "wikilink")) is
automatically set from the convergence threshold, so that sufficient
precision is usually available by default.

The default convergence threshold suffices for most SCF energy and
geometry optimization calculations, providing about 6-8 decimal places
in the energy, and about four significant figures in the density and
energy derivative with respect to nuclear coordinates. However, greater
precision may be required for calculations involving weakly interacting
systems, floppy molecules, finite-difference of gradients to compute the
Hessian, and for post-Hartree-Fock calculations. A threshold of
<img alt="$10^{-6}$" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/ec4c25dce67266d40679a50bf9d75e70.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="33.140745pt" height="26.70657pt"/> is adequate for most such purposes, and a threshold of
<img alt="$10^{-8}$" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/3638e50463da9c60c05d8519c65d3982.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="33.140745pt" height="26.70657pt"/> might be necessary for very high accuracy or very weak
interactions. A threshold of <img alt="$10^{-10}$" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/7e66fb4017db9bbbc21f10b17fe18e42.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="39.668805pt" height="26.70657pt"/> should be regarded as the best
that can be attained in most circumstances.

## MAXITER -- iteration limit

` MAXITER <integer maxiter default 8>`

The maximum number of iterations for the SCF calculation defaults to 20
for both ROHF/RHF and UHF calculations. For most molecules, this number
of iterations is more than sufficient for the quadratically convergent
SCF algorithm to obtain a solution converged to the default threshold
(see [Convergence
threshold](#thresh----convergence-threshold "wikilink") above). If the
SCF program detects that the quadratically convergent algorithm is not
efficient, then it will resort to a linearly convergent algorithm and
increase the maximum number of iterations by 10.

Convergence may not be reached in the maximum number of iterations for
many reasons, including input error (e.g., an incorrect geometry or a
linearly dependent basis), a very low convergence threshold, a poor
initial guess, or the fact that the system is intrinsically hard to
converge due to the presence of many states with similar energies.

The following sets the maximum number of SCF iterations to 50:

` maxiter 50`

## PROFILE -- performance profile

This directive allows the user to obtain timing and parallel execution
information about the SCF module. It is specified by the simple keyword

` PROFILE`

This option can be helpful in understanding the computational
performance of an SCF calculation. However, it can introduce a
significant overhead on machines that have expensive timing routines,
such as the SUN.

## DIIS -- DIIS convergence

This directive allows the user to specify DIIS convergence rather than
second-order convergence for the SCF calculation. The form of the
directive is as follows:

` DIIS`

The implementation of this option is currently fairly rudimentary. It
does not have level-shifting and damping, and does not support open
shells or UHF. It is provided on an "as is" basis, and should be used
with caution.

When the DIIS directive is specified in the input, the user has the
additional option of specifying the size of the subspace for the DIIS
extrapolation. This is accomplished with the DIISBAS directive, which is
of the form:

` DIISBAS <integer diisbas default 5>`

The default of 5 should be adequate for most applications, but may be
increased if convergence is poor. On large systems, it may be necessary
to specify a lower value for diisbas, to conserve memory.

## DIRECT and SEMIDIRECT -- recomputation of integrals

In the context of SCF calculations direct means that all integrals are
recomputed as required and none are stored. The other extreme are disk-
or memory-resident (sometimes termed conventional) calculations in which
all integrals are computed once and stored. Semi-direct calculations are
between these two extremes with some integrals being precomputed and
stored, and all other integrals being recomputed as necessary.

The default behavior of the SCF module is

  - If enough memory is available, the integrals are computed once and
    are cached in memory.
  - If there is not enough memory to store all the integrals at once,
    then 95% of the available disk space in the scratch directory (see
    [File
    directories](Top-level#SCRATCH_DIR_and_PERMANENT_DIR_--_File_directories "wikilink"))
    is assumed to be available for this purpose, and as many integrals
    as possible are cached on disk (with no memory being used for
    caching). Some attempt is made to store the most expensive integrals
    in the cache.
  - If there is not enough room in memory or on disk for all the
    integrals, then the ones that are not cached are recomputed in a
    semidirect fashion.

The integral file is deleted at the end of a calculation, so it is not
possible to restart a semidirect calculation when the integrals are
cached in memory or on disk. Many modern computer systems clear the fast
scratch space at the end of each job, adding a further complication to
the problem of restarting a parallel semidirect calculation.

A fully direct calculation (with recomputation of the integrals at each
iteration) is forced by specifying the directive

` DIRECT`

Alternatively, the SEMIDIRECT directive can be used to control the
default semidirect calculation by defining the amount of disk space and
the cache memory size. The form of this directive is as follows:

`  SEMIDIRECT [filesize `<integer filesize default disksize>`] `  
`             [memsize  `<integer memsize default available>`]`  
`             [filename <string filename default $file_prefix.aoints$]`

The keyword FILESIZE allows the user to specify the amount of disk space
to be used per process for storing the integrals in 64-bit words.
Similarly, the keyword MEMSIZE allows the user to specify the number of
64-bit words to be used per process for caching integrals in memory.
(Note: If the amount of storage space specified by the entry for memsize
is not available, the code cuts the value in half and checks again for
available space. This process is repeated until the request is
satisfied.)

By default, the integral files are placed into the scratch directory
(see [File
directories](Top-level#SCRATCH_DIR_and_PERMANENT_DIR_--_File_directories "wikilink")).
Specifying the keyword FILENAME overrides this default. The
user-specified name entered in the string filename has the process
number appended to it, so that each process has a distinct file but with
a common base-name and directory. Therefore, it is not possible to use
this keyword to specify different disks for different processes. The
SCRATCH\_DIR directive (see [File
directories](Top-level#SCRATCH_DIR_and_PERMANENT_DIR_--_File_directories "wikilink"))
can be used for this purpose.

For example, to force full recomputation of all integrals:

` direct`

Exactly the same result could be obtained by entering the directive:

` semidirect filesize 0 memsize 0`

To disable the use of memory for caching integrals and limit disk usage
by each process to 100 megawords (MW):

` semidirect memsize 0 filesize 100000000`

The integral records are typically 32769 words long and any non-zero
value for filesize or memsize should be enough to hold at least one
record.

### Integral File Size and Format for the SCF Module

The file format is rather complex, since it accommodates a variety of
packing and compression options and the distribution of data. This
section presents some information that may help the user understand the
output, and illustrates how to use the output information to estimate
file sizes.

If integrals are stored with a threshold of greater than <img alt="$10^{-10}$" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/7e66fb4017db9bbbc21f10b17fe18e42.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="39.668805pt" height="26.70657pt"/>,
then the integrals are stored in a 32-bit fixed-point format (with
appropriate treatment for large values to retain precision). If
integrals are stored with a threshold less than <img alt="$10^{-10}$" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/7e66fb4017db9bbbc21f10b17fe18e42.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="39.668805pt" height="26.70657pt"/>, however,
the values are stored in 64-bit floating-point format. If a
replicated-data calculation is being run, then 8 bits are used for each
basis function label, unless there are more than 256 functions, in which
case 16 bits are used. If distributed data is being used, then the
labels are always packed to 8 bits (the distributed blocks always being
less than 256; labels are relative to the start of the block).

Thus, the number (*W*) of 64-bit words required to store *N* integrals,
may be computed as

<img alt="$W = &#10;\begin{cases} &#10;  N,  &amp; \mbox{8-bit labels and 32-bit values} \\&#10;  \frac{3}{2}N, &amp; \mbox{16-bit labels and 32-bit values} \\&#10;  \frac{3}{2}N, &amp; \mbox{8-bit labels and 64-bit values} \\&#10;  2N, &amp; \mbox{16-bit labels and 64-bit values}&#10;\end{cases}$" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/64578eecf7e7887527d86aa023d3995b.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="315.713145pt" height="96.98733pt"/>

The actual number of words required can exceed this computed value by up
to one percent, due to bookkeeping overhead, and because the file itself
is organized into fixed-size records.

With at least the default print level, all semidirect (not direct)
calculations will print out information about the integral file and the
number of integrals computed. The form of this output is as
follows:

`Integral file          = ./c6h6.aoints.0`  
`Record size in doubles =  32769        No. of integs per rec  =  32768`  
`Max. records in memory =      3        Max. records in file   =      5`  
`No. of bits per label  =      8        No. of bits per value  =     32`  
`#quartets = 2.0D+04  #integrals = 7.9D+05  direct = 63.6%  cached = 36.4%`

The file information above relates only to process 0. The line of
information about the number of quartets, integrals, etc., is a sum over
all processes.

When the integral file is closed, additional information of the
following form is printed:

`------------------------------------------------------------`  
`EAF file 0: "./c6h6.aoints.0" size=262152 bytes`  
`------------------------------------------------------------`  
`               write      read    awrite     aread      wait`  
`               -----      ----    ------     -----      ----`  
`     calls:        6        12         0         0         0`  
`   data(b): 1.57e+06  3.15e+06  0.00e+00  0.00e+00`  
`   time(s): 1.09e-01  3.12e-02                      0.00e+00`  
`rate(mb/s): 1.44e+01  1.01e+02`  
`------------------------------------------------------------`  
` Parallel integral file used       4 records with       0 large values`

Again, the detailed file information relates just to process 0, but the
final line indicates the total number of integral records stored by all
processes.

This information may be used to optimize subsequent calculations, for
instance by assigning more memory or disk space.

## SCF Convergence Control Options

Note to users: It is desired that the SCF program converge reliably with
the default options for a wide variety of molecules. In addition, it
should be guaranteed to converge for any system, with sufficient
iterations.

The SCF program uses a preconditioned conjugate gradient (PCG) method
that is unconditionally convergent. Basically, a search direction is
generated by multiplying the orbital gradient (the derivative of the
energy with respect to the orbital rotations) by an approximation to the
inverse of the level-shifted orbital Hessian. In the initial iterations
(see [Controlling the
Newton-Raphson](#NR_--_controlling_the_Newton-Raphson "wikilink")), an
inexpensive one-electron approximation to the inverse orbital Hessian is
used. Closer to convergence, the full orbital Hessian is used, which
should provide quadratic convergence. For both the full or one-electron
orbital Hessians, the inverse-Hessian matrix-vector product is formed
iteratively. Subsequently, an approximate line search is performed along
the new search direction. If the exact Hessian is being employed, then
the line search should require a single step (of unity). Preconditioning
with approximate Hessians may require additional steps, especially in
the initial iterations. It is the (approximate) line search that
provides the convergence guarantee. The iterations required to solve the
linear equations are referred to as micro-iterations. A macro-iteration
comprises both the iterative solution and a line search.

Level-shifting plays the same role in this algorithm as it does in the
conventional iterative solution of the SCF equations. The approximate
Hessian used for preconditioning should be positive definite. If this is
not the case, then level-shifting by a positive constant (Δ) serves to
make the preconditioning matrix positive definite, by adding Δ to all of
its eigenvalues. The level-shifts employed for the RHF orbital Hessian
should be approximately four times (only twice for UHF) the value that
one would employ in a conventional SCF. Level-shifting is automatically
enabled in the early iterations, and the default options suffice for
most test cases.

So why do things go wrong and what can be done to fix convergence
problems? Most problems encountered so far arise either poor initial
guesses or from small or negative eigenvalues of the orbital Hessian.
The atomic orbital guess is usually very good. However, in calculations
on charged systems, especially with open shells, incorrect initial
occupations may result. The SCF might then converge very slowly since
very large orbital rotations might be required to achieve the correct
occupation or move charge large distances in the molecule. Possible
actions are

  - Modify the atomic guess by assigning charges to the atoms known to
    carry substantial charges ([Atomic
    guess](#Atomic_guess_orbitals_with_charged_atoms "wikilink"))
  - Examining an analysis of the initial orbitals
    ([Printing](#Printing_Information_from_the_SCF_Module "wikilink"))
    and then swapping them to attain the desired occupation
    ([VECTORS](#VECTORS_--_input/output_of_MO_vectors "wikilink")).
  - Converging the calculation in a minimal basis set, which is usually
    easier, and then projecting into a larger basis set
    ([VECTORS](#VECTORS_--_input/output_of_MO_vectors "wikilink")).
  - Using the fragment orbital initial guess ([Fragment molecular
    orbitals](#Superposition_of_fragment_molecular_orbitals "wikilink")).

Small or negative Hessian eigenvalues can occur even though the
calculation seem to be close to convergence (as measured by the gradient
norm, or the off-diagonal Fock matrix elements). Small eigenvalues will
cause the iterative linear equation solver to converge slowly, resulting
in an excessive number of micro-iterations. This makes the SCF expensive
in terms of computation time, and it is possible to exceed the maximum
number of iterations without achieving the accuracy required for
quadratic convergence -- which causes more macro-iterations to be
performed.

Two main options are available when a problem will not converge:
Newton-Raphson can be disabled temporarily or permanently (see
[Controlling the
Newton-Raphson](#NR_--_controlling_the_Newton-Raphson "wikilink")), and
level-shifting can be applied to the matrix (see
[Level-shifting](#LEVEL_--_level-shifting_the_orbital_Hessian "wikilink")).
In some cases, both options may be necessary to achieve final
convergence.

If there is reason to suspect a negative eigenvalue, the first course is
to disable the Newton-Raphson iteration until the solution is closer to
convergence. It may be necessary to disable it completely. At some point
close to convergence, the Hessian will be positive definite, so
disabling Newton-Raphson should yield a solution with approximately the
same convergence rate as DIIS.

If temporarily disabling Newton-Raphson is not sufficient to achieve
convergence, it may be necessary to disable it entirely and apply a
small level-shift to the approximate Hessian. This should improve the
convergence rate of the micro-iterations and stabilize the
macro-iterations. The level-shifting will destroy exact quadratic
convergence, but the optimization process is automatically adjusted to
reflect this by enforcing conjugacy and reducing the accuracy to which
the linear equations are solved. The net result of this is that the
solution will do more macro-iterations, but each one should take less
time than it would with the unshifted Hessian.

The following sections describe the directives needed to disable the
Newton-Raphson iteration and specify level-shifting.

## NR -- controlling the Newton-Raphson

`   NR <real nr_switch default 0.1>`

The exact orbital Hessian is adopted as the preconditioner when the
maximum element of the orbital gradient is below the value specified for
nr\_switch. The default value is 0.1, which means that Newton-Raphson
will be disabled until the maximum value of the orbital gradient (twice
the largest off-diagonal Fock matrix element) is less than 0.1. To
disable the Newton-Raphson entirely, the value of nr\_switch must be set
to zero. The directive to accomplish this is as follows:

` nr 0`

## LEVEL -- level-shifting the orbital Hessian

This directive allows the user to specify level-shifting to obtain a
positive-definite preconditioning matrix for the SCF solution procedure.
Separate level shifts can be set for the first-order convergent
one-electron approximation to the Hessian used with the preconditioned
conjugate gradient (PCG) method, and for the full Hessian used with the
Newton-Raphson (NR) approach. It is also possible to change the
level-shift automatically as the solution attains some specified
accuracy. The form of the directive is as follows:

`  LEVEL [pcg <real initial default 20.0> \`  
`          [<real tol default 0.5> <real final default 0.0>]] \`  
`        [nr <real initial default 0.0> \`  
`          [<real tol default 0.0> <real final default 0.0>]]`

This directive contains only two keywords: one for the PCG method and
the other for the exact Hessian (Newton Raphson, or NR). Use of PCG or
NR is determined by the input specified for nr\_switch on the NR
directive, [Controlling the
Newton-Raphson](#NR_--_controlling_the_Newton-Raphson "wikilink") above.

Specifying the keyword pcg on the LEVEL directive allows the user to
define the level shifting for the approximate (i.e., PCG) method.
Specifying the keyword nr allows the user to define the level shifting
for the exact Hessians. In both options, the initial level shift is
defined by the value specified for the variable initial. Optionally, tol
can be specified independently with each keyword to define the level of
accuracy that must be attained in the solution before the level shifting
is changed to the value specified by input in the real variable final.
Level shifts and gradient thresholds are specified in atomic units.

For the PCG method (as specified using the keyword pcg), the defaults
for this input are 20.0 for initial, 0.5 for tol, and 0.0 for final.
This means that the approximate Hessian will be shifted by 20.0 until
the maximum element of the gradient falls below 0.5, at which point the
shift will be set to zero.

For the exact Hessian (as specified using the keyword nr), the defaults
are all zero. The exact Hessian is usually not shifted since this
destroys quadratic convergence. An example of an input directive that
applies a shift of 0.2 to the exact Hessian is as follows:

` level nr 0.2`

To apply this shift to the exact Hessian only until the maximum element
of the gradient falls below 0.005, the required input directive is as
follows:

` level nr 0.2 0.005 0`

Note that in both of these examples, the parameters for the PCG method
are at the default values. To obtain values different from the defaults,
the keyword pcg must also be specified. For example, to specify the
level shifting in the above example for the exact Hessian and
non-default shifting for the PCG method, the directive would be
something like the following:

` level pcg 20 0.3 0.0 nr 0.2 0.005 0.0`

This input will cause the PCG method to be level-shifted by 20.0 until
the maximum element of the gradient falls below 0.3, then the shift will
be zero. For the exact Hessian, the level shifting is initially 0.2,
until the maximum element falls below 0.005, after which the shift is
zero.

The default options correspond to

` level pcg 20 0.5 0 nr 0 0 0`

## Orbital Localization

The SCF module includes an experimental implementation of orbital
localization, including Foster-Boys and Pipek-Mezey which only works for
closed-shell (RHF) wavefunctions. There is currently no input in the SCF
block to control this so the SET directive
([SET](Top-level#SET "wikilink")) must be used.

The directive

` set scf:localize t`

will separately localize the core, valence, and virtual orbital spaces
using the Pipek-Mezey algorithm. If the additional directive

` set scf:loctype FB`

is included, then the Foster-boys algorithm is used. The partitioning of
core-orbitals is performed using the atomic information described in
Section 16.1.

In the next release, this functionality will be extended to included all
wavefunctions using molecular orbitals.

## Printing Information from the SCF Module

All output from the SCF module is controlled using the PRINT directive
described in [Print
control](Print_Noprint "wikilink").
The following list describes the items from SCF that are currently under
direct print control, along with the print level for each
one.

\[htbp\]

<center>

|                            |                 |                                             |
| -------------------------- | --------------- | ------------------------------------------- |
| **Name**                   | **Print Level** | **Description**                             |
| "atomic guess density"     | debug           | guess density matrix                        |
| "atomic scf"               | debug           | details of atomic SCF                       |
| "mo guess"                 | default         | brief info from mo guess                    |
| "information"              | low             | results                                     |
| "initial vectors"          | debug           |                                             |
| "intermediate vectors"     | debug           |                                             |
| "final vectors"            | debug           |                                             |
| "final vectors analysis"   | default         |                                             |
| "initial vectors analysis" | never           |                                             |
| "intermediate evals"       | debug           |                                             |
| "final evals"              | default         |                                             |
| "schwarz"                  | high            | integral screening info stats at completion |
| "screening statistics"     | debug           | display stats after every Fock build        |
| "geometry"                 | high            |                                             |
| "symmetry"                 | debug           | detailed symmetry info                      |
| "basis"                    | high            |                                             |
| "geombas"                  | debug           | detailed basis map info                     |
| "vectors i/o"              | default         | report vectors I/O                          |
| "parameters"               | default         | convergence parameters                      |
| "convergence"              | default         | info each iteration                         |
| "mulliken ao"              | never           | Mulliken population of basis functions      |

Table 1: SCF Print Control Specifications  

</center>

## Hartree-Fock or SCF, MCSCF and MP2 Gradients

The input for this directive allows the user to adjust the print control
for the SCF, UHF, ROHF, MCSCF and MP2 gradients. The form of the
directive is as follows:

` GRADIENTS `  
`   [print || noprint] ...`  
` END`

The complementary keyword pair print and noprint allows the user some
additional control on the information that can be included in the print
output from the SCF calculation. Currently, only a few items can be
explicitly invoked via print control. These are as follows:

<center>

|               |                 |                             |
| ------------- | --------------- | --------------------------- |
| **Name**      | **Print Level** | **Description**             |
| "information" | low             | calculation info            |
| "geometry"    | high            | geometry information        |
| "basis"       | high            | basis set(s) used           |
| "forces"      | low             | details of force components |
| "timing"      | default         | timing for each phase       |

Table 2: Gradient Print Control Specifications  

</center>

## References

<references/>

1.  Wong, A. T. and Harrison, R. J. (1995) "Approaches to large-scale
    parallel self-consistent field calculation", *J. Comp. Chem.*
    **16**, 1291-1300, doi:
    [10.1002/jcc.540161010](http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jcc.540161010)
2.  Foster, I. T.; Tilson, J. L.; Wagner, A. F.; Shepard, R. L.;
    Harrison, R. J.; Kendall, R. A. and Littlefield, R. J. (1996)
    "Toward high-performance computational chemistry: I. Scalable Fock
    matrix construction algorithms", *J. Comp. Chem.* **17**, 109-123,
    doi:
    \[<http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1096-987X(19960115)17:1%3C109>::AID-JCC9%3E3.0.CO;2-V
    10.1002/(SICI)1096-987X(19960115)17:1\<109::AID-JCC9\>3.0.CO;2-V\]
